so I'm an Australian artist I'm based in
Brooklyn
I use 3d laser scanning to create video
and prints and 3d printed sculpture my
work does not in fact engage with
blockchain but nevertheless over the
course of my career I've been really
interested in how we can use technology
critically within the context about
history and within what you might think
of as a more traditional sculpture and
image making practice the end point of
my work is usually a physical object but
I nevertheless aim to use the tech that
gets me there against the grain and to
challenge the assumptions and the blind
spots that are inherent in its design
I'm also very interested in asserting my
own embodiment and humanity in any
interaction with any machine that I have
and exploring the ways that new imaging
tools fail to capture the human body and
then in particular as an artist what the
poetics of that failure might look like
so I trained as a photographer I
graduated from Goldsmith's College about
15 years ago before the school had an
immediate department but not long into
my career in photography I became very
very frustrated with the limitations of
the medium and the current trend this
was the era of andreas gursky and the
disorder of school there's disembodied
huge kind of images of depopulated
posthuman spaces and I was always really
interested in working at ground level
and in not making such grand claims for
the the technology that I was using
simultaneously I became really
fascinated with 3d imagery and it
allowed you to create a virtual camera
and virtual lights and virtual materials
and kind of play photographer in this
space where the real world physics
didn't really apply I enrolled at RMIT
spatial information architecture lab and
in Melbourne in Australia to study 3d
modeling and a team of architects there
were using 3d scanning and 3d printing
to reconstruct gaudi's famously
unfinished Sagrada família they were
actually 3d scanning his original
maquettes and then using those to create
parametric models that were eventually
3d printed and then used
in the reconstruction efforts and that
was my first intro to 3d this was well
before the the buzz around 3d printing
that's now kind of faded down and I
remember as the technician what happens
if you use this stuff wrong what if you
misuse it and he goes it's gross you get
these chunks these floating gross chunks
all over the place so as an artist right
away I wanted to know what that looked
like I can talk about the skin without
the video playing so this is the scanner
that I used in all my work it uses a red
laser beam and a video camera and a
tracking magnet to create a digital 3d
model of whatever it's pointed out you
have to work up close you as a scanner
operator you get right up very personal
with your model and you choose what gets
painted in and what's left out the
process felt like an extension of my
workers of photography because it still
used light and a lens and it felt like
almost sitting for a victorian-era
portrait the person has to stay still
and close their eyes and to protect the
laser is not a safe but that generated
these other really strange emotional
resonances it looks particularly to me
like a death mask akha plaster death
mask where the skin is rendered in this
unfortunately default white and you lose
all motion these are some more of those
chunks so I started kind of sneaking
into the lab and I was working with the
scanner after hours and I was performing
for it with my own body and with with
other models bodies the process was not
quite generative but it also wasn't
really under my control and it was
endlessly surprising like a performance
for both the body and the machine my
favorite way to begin an artwork is to
find a space where two incompatible
things collide and to look at what
happens from that collision and so this
was the perfect condition to create
something unexpected these are some of
my very very early experiment
so I also have training in the history
of photography and one thing that the
scans brought up for me was this idea of
the death leanness that ensues when we
try and capture life historians of
photography have talked about a
photographic image of a person as a
zombie or a reanimated corpse a
doppelganger there's this Dorian Gray
quality that is haunting whether the
person in a photograph stays the same
way as your real body just trudges
onwards and ages towards the grave new
camera is a new scanning technology that
sold to us claims to capture life with
with ever more kind of veracity but we
all know this by now the theory of the
uncanny valley that as technological
imaging tools approach the perfect
replication of the body they actually
become ever more upsetting and kind of
horrifying
so the Polar Express Final Fantasy this
was kind of the peak when people were
we're talking about the uncanny valley
and animation has since really backed
off I think on trying to capture the
body because we just kind of can't do it
without creating something really creepy
some of my early prints they were
inspired by Victorian spirit photography
it's a really fantastic example to me of
a very early critical use of technology
you're using something that's supposedly
objective and used for evidence but
creating these ridiculous narratives
with ghosts and floating faces and
figures and it's very hyperbolic and
overblown and emotional and I really
connected with that so these are my
spirit photographs there's a large
prints and installed in this gallery
with a kind of tomb like mausoleum kind
of atmosphere
so I began to 3d print the work when the
market opened up a little bit more to
consumers around 2005 2006 and getting
the terrible glitchy scan data that I
was working with was kind of a Herculean
digital effort to actually materialize
it but I'd fought the upload systems and
and I won and created these sculptural
works that looks like deconstructed
monuments or memorials I was trying to
create the sense of kind of a future
artifact these are all made from life
using real models and the each scan is
made in a kind of 3 or 4 minute time
span I then started casting them in
bronze to further kind of dialogue with
with traditional materials from the art
world and from art history but again
when you get up close you see the
digital build line and you see that this
is a kind of machine made artifact so
it's a it's kind of a forgery and a fake
and that's the idea that I come back to
a lot in my practice this portrait in
particular is one of my my favorites
that I've made the model actually had
the idea to do a triple scan where she
would hold still and then she would turn
her head I would scan her once and then
she turn and I'd scan her a third time
so this is an image of about 10 minutes
in in her life almost this kind of
cubist sense of the accumulation of time
that's frozen into a kind of still space
the digital the kind of polygons and the
glitch that run over her eyes and mouth
are the result of my trying to ask my
software to reconcile data that really
doesn't make any sense and it freaks
doubt freaks out and generates this kind
of fungus that just populates across her
face which I liked but after after
making a lot of these kind of death
masks and death head type portraits I
decided that I wanted to make some
larger
life-size sculptures of the body I've
always come back to making imagery of
the human figure and it's always been
resonant to me in a way that nothing
else can really capture because when a
viewer there's so much of our brain is
attune to recognizing facial features
you know we can recognize 10,000 people
just walking that we might bump into
walking down the street you recognize
somebody's face from 10 years ago you
know there's so much of our brain is so
sensitive to the human face and the
human body and when that's broken when
that's kind of digitally damaged
there's I've always found that to be
more poignant as a viewer then then
looking at a damaged scan of an object
so I wanted to continue working with the
body with the female body and I wanted
to look at ways that sculpture can kind
of try and capture the past and try and
create memorials
so I started particularly looking at
venereal sculpture this is from the book
that was inspired a whole body of work
it's called saving graces and it's
photographs of women in cemeteries so
there was this odd kind of phenomenon
that happened where the specific
memorials to men and the specific
memorials to women were very somber and
there were these you know well-dressed
kind of sleeping respectable figures but
within a cemetery you would have these
incredibly racy nude anonymous women
somehow okay even though this is a
religious religious space in a very
solemn space and they're enacting these
kind of allegories of perhaps mourning
and grief but maybe very next to see
this very bizarre nexus of like memory
and sex and death that that I keep
coming back to as an artist so these
kind of formed the this thinking form
the cornerstone of a lot of my my large
work here's a more respectable lady
in the cemetery also the idea the image
of the reclining female figure it became
a very personal one for me and it
referenced a history my own which is now
in the past of chronic illness and
disability and there was a time when I
was making these works where I was so
ill all I could really do was to kind of
lie on the ground and be scanned like I
couldn't stand I couldn't you know do
anything really athletic and as somebody
who had been through every imaginable
medical test and every imaginable
medical imaging procedure as a passive
person as a patient kind of submitting
to the machine gaze it felt very
empowering to use a kind of cheesy
cheesy word to be the person who was
making these images and to be the person
who was operating the machine and not
the person who is having the machine
operate on her so these are some more of
my kind of sleeping figures this was
actually a design for my own tomb which
was my most kind of tongue-in-cheek
project like I think that was like that
Republican senator that uh did the same
thing
getting a little bit ahead of myself it
would have cost fifty thousand dollars
to make in CNC milled marble so this is
a hypothetical project only one day and
then lastly I also wanted to think about
this idea of the the architectural
fragment and the fake because I spent so
much time working with these digitally
damaged objects with kind of things that
had been glitched in the software of
which tin the printer and there was
positive and negative space and I was
trying to think about how you how you
represent that negative space once you
get a digital artifact that becomes a
physical object you know how do you
piece it together and how do you
represent the pieces that are missing so
I was I've started looking at at
archaeology at this idea of kind of
creating a figure in space where the
negative is also activated
and I worked with a museum mount maker
the same as air mount maker that created
the displays for the ancient art
galleries at the Art Institute of
Chicago which is across the road from
where this show was and it had this same
feel it had a dark gallery
it had museum lights that had these
perfect pedestals but then when you got
up close you saw that it wasn't damaged
classical marble and it wasn't an
artifact that had been through war and
you know violence and unearthed and
whatever again it was plastic it was a
fake it was a cheap material it was
endlessly replicatable so I'm always
trying to kind of toy with with
expectations and really own the fact
that I'm making plastic work because I
think you have to own it this piece is
called memorial bust of a woman
self-portrait
and that was the installation I also
used just incidentally the same gray
I took a gray sample from Maya which is
the software that I created this in so
it was kind of a simultaneous physical
recreation of a digital render and also
a nod to history and the best compliment
I had was from a Michael at one of my
classmates who walked in and said I feel
like I'm standing in your computer right
now and it's really freaking me out
so my new series which had been working
on for a couple years is called protons
eight-game focuses on machine images of
the female body but how that transaction
can create resistance that reveals the
limits of representational technology
and in order to create the choreography
for it I mind a very specific and fairly
disturbing kind of place in history this
is my photograph of the PDA so Patriot
Hospital in Paris I recently visited
after working on this project for a few
years right now it's it's just a
hospital there's not a lot to see
but at its peak I think during the
French Revolution at how housed over
10,000 inmates in the 19th century many
of its female patients were deemed
hysterics so this was a now discounted
but at the time massively prevalent
diagnosis and the lead doctor at the
time of the sole patriot doctor
jean-martin charcot was instrumental in
kind of the invention of hysteria he
used it was a teaching hospital so he
would have patients reenact what he
called a hysterical attack if necessary
he would use very violent means to do
this including electric shock or he had
a device that was called an ovary
compressor which I don't even want to
imagine what that was really really
pretty upsetting and so on cue they
would go through this range of poses
which he he and an artist working at the
hospital developed this bizarre
choreography some of them are called the
period of passionate
the period of clown ism but again what
was fascinating to me is somebody
interested in in technology was that the
technology of photography was used to
classify this and codify it technology
was massively used at the Seoul Petri
air and there's a book called the
invention of hysteria that you can read
if you're interested in delving more
into that history again it does hold
with my interest in the way that
technology that is sold to us as being
truthful and objective you know that's
used like 3d scanning in military
surveillance and intelligence in
forensic capture and reconstruction is
used to try and codify something absurd
I mean how can you represent madness how
can you visually capture madness it's
it's a fool's errand
I'm not the first artist to be making
work on hysteria by any means this as
many it's it's fairly well trodden but
nevertheless I embarked on this project
I think actually this is Anna Lee was
one of my models who is here to I this
is from a residency I did at a hotel
scanning I worked with male and female
models actually and these are some of
the resulting pieces these are actually
shown at I beam in the last show that
was at their Chelsea space it was called
New Romantics the period of clown ism
and the period of passionate attitudes
and I also began to integrate another
kind of unintended artifact from the
technical process which was the the 3d
printed supports they're actually
generated by the software to hold up the
the piece I've always been engaging with
this question of what happens when you
materialize something digital how do you
support it and how do you prop it up
when it comes out as an object into the
real world and it's subject subject to
the laws of physics and gravity these I
kind of fell in love with this image
because it seemed like something was
flowing out of the woman's body you're
kind of weeping you know tears and began
to integrate that imagery of these kind
of architectural supports into the
bodies as they enacted these incredibly
physically demanding hysterical poses it
became a way to kind of hold them up but
it also suggested the female body as a
site of construction of deconstruction
something under demolition and they
almost resembled these monuments or you
know like a building like the female
body as architecture so these are some
of my early sketches and then the latest
this is the very latest version of it
these are a series of maquettes and this
a life-sized version of this piece is
going to be shown at bit forms gallery
in New York opening October 26th if
anybody is in the city then and that's
about all thank you so much
[Applause]